Liberty, in philosophy, involves free will as contrasted with determinism.[1] In
politics, liberty consists of the social and political freedoms enjoyed by all
citizens.[2] In theology, liberty is freedom from the bondage of sin.[3]

Philosophy Main article: Free will

Philosophers from earliest times have considered the question of liberty. Roman
Emperor Marcus Aurelius (121–180 AD) wrote of "a polity in which there is the
same law for all, a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal
freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government which respects most of
all the freedom of the governed."[4] According to Thomas Hobbes, "a free man is
he that in those things which by his strength and wit he is able to do is not
hindered to do what he hath the will to do" (Leviathan, Part 2, Ch. XXI).

John Locke (1632–1704) rejected that definition of liberty. While not
specifically mentioning Hobbes, he attacks Sir Robert Filmer who had the same
definition. According to Locke:

    "In the state of nature, liberty consists of being free from any superior
    power on Earth. People are not under the will or lawmaking authority of
    others but have only the law of nature for their rule. In political society,
    liberty consists of being under no other lawmaking power except that
    established by consent in the commonwealth. People are free from the
    dominion of any will or legal restraint apart from that enacted by their own
    constituted lawmaking power according to the trust put in it. Thus, freedom
    is not as Sir Robert Filmer defines it: ‘A liberty for everyone to do what
    he likes, to live as he pleases, and not to be tied by any laws.’ Freedom is
    constrained by laws in both the state of nature and political society.
    Freedom of nature is to be under no other restraint but the law of nature.
    Freedom of people under government is to be under no restraint apart from
    standing rules to live by that are common to everyone in the society and
    made by the lawmaking power established in it. Persons have a right or
    liberty to (1) follow their own will in all things that the law has not
    prohibited and (2) not be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, and
    arbitrary wills of others."[5]

John Stuart Mill.

John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), in his work, On Liberty, was the first to
recognize the difference between liberty as the freedom to act and liberty as
the absence of coercion.[6] In his book, Two Concepts of Liberty, Isaiah Berlin
formally framed the differences between these two perspectives as the
distinction between two opposite concepts of liberty: positive liberty and
negative liberty. The latter designates a negative condition in which an
individual is protected from tyranny and the arbitrary exercise of authority,
while the former refers to the liberty that comes from self-mastery, the freedom
from inner compulsions such as weakness and fear. Politics Main article:
Political freedom History The Statue of Liberty, donated to the US by France, an
artistic personification of liberty.

The modern concept of political liberty has its origins in the Greek concepts of
freedom and slavery.[7] To be free, to the Greeks, was to not have a master, to
be independent from a master (to live like one likes).[8] That was the original
Greek concept of freedom. It is closely linked with the concept of democracy, as
Aristotle put it:

"This, then, is one note of liberty which all democrats affirm to be the
principle of their state. Another is that a man should live as he likes. This,
they say, is the privilege of a freeman, since, on the other hand, not to live
as a man likes is the mark of a slave. This is the second characteristic of
democracy, whence has arisen the claim of men to be ruled by none, if possible,
or, if this is impossible, to rule and be ruled in turns; and so it contributes
to the freedom based upon equality."[9]

This applied only to free men. In Athens, for instance, women could not vote or
hold office and were legally and socially dependent on a male relative.[10]

The populations of the Persian Empire enjoyed some degree of freedom. Citizens
of all religions and ethnic groups were given the same rights and had the same
freedom of religion, women had the same rights as men, and slavery was abolished
(550 BC). All the palaces of the kings of Persia were built by paid workers in
an era when slaves typically did such work.[11]

In the Buddhist Maurya Empire of ancient India, citizens of all religions and
ethnic groups had some rights to freedom, tolerance, and equality. The need for
tolerance on an egalitarian basis can be found in the Edicts of Ashoka the
Great, which emphasize the importance of tolerance in public policy by the
government. The slaughter or capture of prisoners of war was also condemned by
Ashoka.[12] Slavery was also non-existent in the Maurya Empire.[13] However,
according to Hermann Kulke and Dietmar Rothermund, "Ashoka's orders seem to have
been resisted right from the beginning."[14]

Roman law also embraced certain limited forms of liberty, even under the rule of
the Roman Emperors. However, these liberties were accorded only to Roman
citizens. Many of the liberties enjoyed under Roman law endured through the
Middle Ages, but were enjoyed solely by the nobility, never by the common man.
The idea of unalienable and universal liberties had to wait until the Age of
Enlightenment. Social contract Eugène Delacroix – La liberté guidant le peuple
(1830) In French Liberty. British Slavery (1792), James Gillray caricatured
French "liberty" as the opportunity to starve and British "slavery" as bloated
complaints about taxation.

The social contract theory, most influentially formulated by Hobbes, John Locke
and Rousseau (though first suggested by Plato in The Republic), was among the
first to provide a political classification of rights, in particular through the
notion of sovereignty and of natural rights. The thinkers of the Enlightenment
reasoned that law governed both heavenly and human affairs, and that law gave
the king his power, rather than the king's power giving force to law. The divine
right of kings was thus opposed to the sovereign's unchecked auctoritas. This
conception of law would find its culmination in the ideas of Montesquieu. The
conception of law as a relationship between individuals, rather than families,
came to the fore, and with it the increasing focus on individual liberty as a
fundamental reality, given by "Nature and Nature's God," which, in the ideal
state, would be as universal as possible.

In On Liberty, John Stuart Mill sought to define the "...nature and limits of
the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual,"
and as such, he describes an inherent and continuous antagonism between liberty
and authority and thus, the prevailing question becomes "how to make the fitting
adjustment between individual independence and social control".[15] Origins of
political freedom United States

The United States of America was one of the first nations to be founded on
principles of freedom and equality, with no king and no hereditary nobility.
According to the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence, all men have a
natural right to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness". But this
declaration of liberty was flawed from the outset by the presence of slavery.
Slave owners argued that their liberty was paramount, since it involved
property, their slaves, and that the slaves themselves had no rights that any
White man was obliged to recognize. The Supreme Court, in the Dred Scott
decision, upheld this principle. It was not until 1866, following the Civil War,
that the US constitution was amended to extend these rights to persons of color,
and not until 1920 that these rights were extended to women.[16]

By the later half of the 20th century, liberty was expanded further to prohibit
government interference with personal choices. In the United States Supreme
Court decision Griswold v. Connecticut, Justice William O. Douglas argued that
liberties relating to personal relationships, such as marriage, have a unique
primacy of place in the hierarchy of freedoms.[17] Jacob M. Appel has summarized
this principle:

    I am grateful that I have rights in the proverbial public square – but, as a
    practical matter, my most cherished rights are those that I possess in my
    bedroom and hospital room and death chamber. Most people are far more
    concerned that they can control their own bodies than they are about
    petitioning Congress.[18]

In modern America, various competing ideologies have divergent views about how
best to promote liberty. Liberals in the original sense of the word see equality
as a necessary component of freedom. Progressives stress freedom from business
monopoly as essential. Libertarians disagree, and see economic freedom as best.
And, starting in the early 21st century, the Tea Party movement sees big
government as the enemy of freedom.[19][20] France

France supported the Americans in their revolt against English rule and, in
1789, overthrew their own monarchy, with the cry of "Liberté, égalité,
fraternité". The bloodbath that followed, known as the reign of terror, soured
many people on the idea of liberty. Edmund Burke, considered one of the fathers
of conservatism, wrote "The French had shewn themselves the ablest architects of
ruin that had hitherto existed in the world."[21] Ideologies Liberalism Main
article: Liberalism

According to the Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, liberalism is "the
belief that it is the aim of politics to preserve individual rights and to
maximize freedom of choice". But they point out that there is considerable
discussion about how to achieve those goals. Every discussion of freedom depends
of three key components: who is free, what are they free to do, and what forces
restrict their freedom.[22] John Gray argues that the core belief of liberalism
is toleration. Liberals allow others freedom to do what they want, in exchange
for having the same freedom in return. This idea of freedom is personal rather
than political.[23] William Safire points out that liberalism is attacked by
both the Right and the Left: by the Right for defending such practices as
abortion, homosexuality, and atheism, by the Left for defending free enterprise
and the rights of the individual over the collective.[24] Libertarianism Main
articles: Libertarianism, Minarchism and Libertarian Socialism

Libertarians hold liberty as their primary political value.[25][26] Libertarian
philosophers hold that there is no tenable distinction between personal and
economic liberty – that they are, indeed, one and the same, to be protected (or
opposed) together. In the context of U.S. constitutional law, for example, they
point out that the constitution twice lists "life, liberty, and property"
without making any distinctions within that troika.[27] Their approach to
implementing liberty involves opposing any governmental coercion, aside from
that which is necessary to prevent individuals from coercing each other.[28]
This is known as the non-aggression principle.[29]

Libertarians hold that liberty does not fall on the Left-Right axis of the
political spectrum, but falls at the libertarian end of an orthogonal
Libertarian-Authoritarian axis, represented in the 2-dimensional Nolan
Chart.[30] Republican liberty

According to republican theorists of freedom, like the historian Quentin
Skinner[31][32] or the philosopher Philip Pettit,[33] one's liberty should not
be viewed as the absence of interference in one's actions, but as
non-domination. According to this view, which originates in the Roman Digest, to
be a liber homo, a free man, means not being subject to another's arbitrary
will, that is to say, dominated by another. They also cite Machiavelli[34] who
asserted that you must be a member of a free self-governing civil association, a
republic, if you are to enjoy individual liberty.

The predominance of this view of liberty among parliamentarians during the
English Civil War resulted to the creation of the liberal concept of freedom as
non-interference in Thomas Hobbes's Leviathan.